Picture
an optimal approach for storing and
retrieving data. Does something like
this come to mind?
>> Well, your mom tells you not to do,
which is just like throw everything all
over the floor in random locations is
something that actually works on a
computer. It's a very nonhuman data
structure. These data structures called
hashts are essential to modern
computing.
>> Hashts are really a generalpurpose tool
that a program can then use on the fly.
>> Hashts are designed to insert or store
elements of information in empty slots
and then search for these elements via
queries.
>> The big challenge in hasht design is the
trade-off between the fullness of the
hash table versus the insertion and
query time. There's this tension between
time and space.
>> In 2025, a student and two co-authors
published research that overturn the
field's decadesl long understanding
about the limits of how hashts can
function.
>> It is very impressive when an undergrad
disproves a long-standing important
conjecture of a touring award winner.
But he actually did something more
exciting.
Hashts use an algorithm called a hash
function to efficiently store and
retrieve data. Like a librarian who uses
an ingenious system to shelf books that
speeds up locating them later on.
>> The hasht can in principle do these very
clever things in order to make these
insertions and these queries be very
timeefficient.
>> The first hasht was invented in the
1950s by IBM engineer Hans Peter Lon. He
had this insight that what you want to
do when you're building a hash table is
you want to use randomness to your
advantage.
>> The hash function uses randomness to
help select locations in memory. It then
inserts information in the first open
slot it finds.
>> Basically, you just try a bunch of
random spots until you find a free one.
In 1985, the computer scientist Andrew
Yao, who would go on to win the touring
award, the field's highest honor,
concluded that this approach called
uniform probing was the best possible.
>> So Yao's paper had this really fantastic
theorem that showed that yes, uniform
probing is optimal.
>> But optimal isn't always fast. As memory
gets full, it can take longer and longer
to find an empty slot. That last guy you
need to insert, that's the killer,
right? You're going to have to look and
look and look. In the very basic table,
if you have a million items, the last
item you insert, you have to look in
basically a million locations.
>> And most computer scientists believed
Yao's conclusion that this was the best
that could be done.
Four decades later, Andrew Karpivven met
his future collaborators while in
undergrad at Rutgers University.
>> And he was taking my graduate algorithms
class and he came up to me and says,
"Oh, I have an improvement to your tiny
pointers paper."
>> While tinkering with his mentors data
objects called tiny pointers, Andrew
ended up inventing his own hasht.
>> That hasht is a very simple counter
example to Yao's conjecture. It kind of
opened our eyes. is we said, "Wow, maybe
our understanding of this area is not as
complete as we thought."
>> So, the team dived into the literature
on the topic while continuing to develop
a string of Andrew's new ideas.
>> We ended up discovering this much more
surprising result, which was that it's
not just that Yao's conjecture isn't
true. There's actually a way to just
entirely bypass Yao's theorem.
In their recent paper, Andrew and his
collaborators constructed a new kind of
hash table that doesn't always put data
in the first empty slot.
>> I'm going to look ahead and if I find a
free slot that is for some reason a slot
that I really want to fill, I will fill
that slot instead. You're just not
required to take the first one you can
find. And it does better. That to me was
completely shocking. And their hasht has
another surprising property, a near
constant average query time, which is
something Yao thought impossible.
>> We discovered that if you don't insert
in the first spot,
>> the queries are super fast on average.
Actually, your average doesn't even
depend on how full your table is. Even
if you fill it up 100%, your average
will still be some fixed number. The
main result of the paper says there is
no fundamental tension between space and
time.
Over the last two decades, dozens of
research teams have raced to be the
first to build a practical paradigm
shifting quantum computer.
>> The hope is that by building this
quantum computer, we'll be able to solve
these these problems that are basically
completely intractable using uh
classical machines. But the unique
challenges of working with cubits, the
finicky fundamental building blocks of
quantum computers, have long kept this
reality out of reach. We have a chasm, a
chasm between what is physically
achievable and physical cubits regarding
error rates. How do we cross that chasm?
Well, we're going to try to use quantum
error correction as a bridge.
>> In a major first, a team at Google
surpassed a key milestone in quantum
error correction, charting a path
forward. Finally, you can kind of see in
practice what we kind of already knew
would happen in theory for like 20
years, 25 years. So, yeah, that's very
exciting.
>> Unlike classical computers that perform
calculations using bits that are either
zeros or ones, quantum computers harness
the unique properties of quantum
mechanics.
>> A cubit at the end of the day, it's kind
of a mathematical object. A cubit can be
sort of a continuum of states, including
superpositions between 0 and one. By
manipulating the collective states of
cubits, quantum computers can perform
powerful calculations. But performing
calculations with cubits is tricky.
Errors easily creep in.
>> You can have a continuum of states,
which means you also have a continuum of
errors you need to correct. Sort of an
infinity of errors
>> and any single error can ruin the whole
calculation.
In the 1990s, the mathematician Peter
Shore devised a groundbreaking factoring
algorithm that demonstrated the
potential of quantum computing. But it
required so many steps that many thought
it could never run.
>> If you have a probability of an error
every thousand steps, then you're never
going to get through an algorithm that
is a trillion steps without making a
mistake.
>> There was basically a lot of skepticism
that we could ever control quantum
effects to that level of precision.
Shore and others realized that it's
possible in principle to correct errors
by adding extra cubits. Then in 1998,
Russian physicist Alexi Katay proposed
one such technique called the surface
code.
>> The surface code very surprisingly
simple scheme. We just place our cubits
on a square lettuce and then perform uh
local measurements on these cubits. With
the surface code, cubits are arranged in
overlapping grids consisting of data
cubits and error measurement cubits.
>> And so they're all sharing the quantum
information in a very carefully
orchestrated way such that we can check
for local errors.
>> And this collection of physical cubits
functions as a single highquality
logical cubit.
>> We have many cubits work together to
express a single more perfect cubit. And
that single logical cubit is more
reliable than any of its physical parts.
In order to build a viable quantum
computer, Google's quantum AI team first
needed to overcome a major hurdle.
Engineering reliable cubits.
>> If your physical cubits are good enough,
their performance is better than a
certain threshold. Then as we add more
and more cubits, then we'll
exponentially reduce the errors that
we're experiencing.
>> But at first, the team's cubits weren't
up to snuff.
>> We've had systems that were very, very
good, but nonetheless, the physical
cubits weren't quite there. As we made
the system larger, the error just got
worse and worse. The the errors
overwhelmed the error correction. We
basically had to go back to the drawing
board.
>> After years spent improving their cubit
design and scaling up the size of the
surface code, the team finally put their
new 72 cubit processor cenamed Willow to
the test.
>> We saw like a 40 or 50% error
suppression improvement just on this
first run. Seeing it work convincingly
for the first time, it was a much more
joyous route. they had crossed a
critical threshold causing error rates
to plummet exponentially.
>> This is the first time the whole system
is working well together where we can
actually see the exponential with our
own eyes and see that error cutting in
half as we increase the code size.
>> I'm kind of in awe of like the the
engineering that kind of went into this.
It's really really complicated. I think
there's still uh a way to go um to make
things practical. So I think this is
kind of a demonstration of that that
things work. We know now that we can
build devices that are accurate enough
that if they are scaled they will be
able to solve some of the hardest
problems uh that you know humanity
faces.
>> A key challenge for programmers is
managing trade-offs between
computational speed or time and space
and memory.
>> We want to minimize the the time that we
take to solve problems. We also don't
want our programs to consume a lot of
memory.
>> For decades, computer scientists assumed
that for certain problems, the
relationship between time and space was
essentially fixed.
>> If a computation used a certain amount
of time, it will probably use roughly
that amount of space.
>> Now, in a groundbreaking paper, MIT
researcher Ryan Williams has proved that
you can always get away with a lot less
space.
>> His improvement was enormous. No, it was
completely unexpected and I didn't
believe it was true.
>> The space-time problem is central to the
field of complexity theory.
>> Complexity theory studies what problems
can be solved with efficient resources.
>> The resource of time refers specifically
to the number of steps a computation
takes.
>> Like say how many instructions that your
processor goes through in order to find
the end result. While space is the
amount of memory utilized during this
computation,
>> how much space does it need to like
store intermediate results in its
computation while it's working?
>> For many algorithms, the amount of space
needed is roughly proportional to
runtime.
>> If you take t steps of time, then uh the
amount of space you consume is only
about tight. You can't really add any
more to your memory in one step than
like one more unit of space. The longer
and longer a computation takes, the more
and more memory it will use.
>> In 1975, a trio of computer scientists
found a way to tweak this dynamic. They
devised what's called a universal
simulation, a technique that could take
any algorithm and convert it so it saves
a little bit of space. From a
theoretical perspective, this is amazing
that you can even do this little bit of
savings.
>> But for the next 50 years, any further
progress seemed impossible. there were
like uh provable limitations on the
particular strategy that people were
using.
>> In 2024, Williams curiosity was aroused
by his students presentation on the work
of researchers James Cook and Ian Mertz.
The pair were focused on a seemingly
unrelated problem called tree
evaluation.
>> When we worked on tree evaluation, we
didn't think anything of uh space versus
time in that way.
>> Williams noticed something interesting
at its core. The way the cook merch tree
evaluation algorithm goes, they say,
"Hey, what if you just try to reuse the
space over and over? I've already got
space that's already allocated. I'm
going to add on top of it."
>> The algorithm can squeeze more
information into locations and memory
already in use.
>> Adding in a bunch of extra things, but
all the extra things are going to cancel
out, but you didn't get have to use
extra space. Williams also realized that
Cook and Mertz's approach could possibly
be used for something more wide ranging.
>> It gives a very specific, very
well-defined procedure for taking sort
of any computation and re-implementing
it so that it uses drastically less
space than before.
>> So, Williams wrote down his thoughts
before setting them aside for a few
months.
>> I just thought this was like another one
of my hairbrain ideas. I went back, I
returned, I decided, okay, I'm just
going to confirm that this thing doesn't
work.
>> But it did work and it functions as a
universal simulation that converts any
algorithm to save a substantial amount
of space.
>> In my uh paper uh I show that uh
actually time t in this very general uh
framework can be simulated only about
square root of t space. It's a it's a
it's a drastic space savings and this is
true regardless of uh the the kind of
computation you're running. When it
comes down to it, all I'm all I did was
sort of uncover the magic that was
already there.
>> So Ryan did the most important thing
that you could do, which is that he drew
a connection between things that were
already in the literature and then put
in the pure elbow grease to make the
whole thing work. I'm in awe of uh the
work that he did, but of course I'm also
thrilled to have played a part in it.